VIII. The Village.
After hoeing, or perhaps reading and writing, in the forenoon I usually bathed again in
the pond, swimming across one of its coves for a stint, and washed the dust of labor
from my person, or smoothed out the last wrinkle which study had made, and for the afternoon
was absolutely free. Every day or two I strolled to the village to hear some of the gossip
which is incessantly going on there, circulating either from mouth to mouth or from newspaper
to newspaper, and which, taken in homeopathic doses, was really as refreshing in its way
as the rustle of leaves and the peeping of frogs. As I walked in the woods to see the
birds and squirrels, so I walked in the village to see the men and boys. Instead of the wind
among the pines I heard the carts rattle. In one direction from my house there was a
colony of muskrats, in the river meadows, under the grove of elms and buttonwoods. In
the other horizon was a village of busy men, as curious to me as if they had been prairie
dogs, each sitting at the mouth of its burrow, or running over to a neighbor's to gossip.
I went there frequently to observe their habits. The village appeared to me a great newsroom,
and, on one side, to support it, as once at Redding & Company's on State Street they kept
nuts and raisins, or salt and meal and other groceries. Some have such a vast appetite
for the former commodity, that is, the news, and such sound digestive organs, that they
can sit forever in public avenues without stirring, and let it simmer and whisper through
them like the Atesian winds, or as if inhaling ether, it only producing numbness and insensibility
to pain, otherwise it would often be painful to bear, without affecting the consciousness.
I hardly ever failed, when I rambled through the village, to see a row of such worthies,
either sitting on a ladder sunning themselves with their bodies inclined forward and their
eyes glancing along the line this way and that from time to time with a voluptuous expression,
or else leaning against a barn with their hands in their pockets, like keratides, as
if to prop it up, they, being commonly out of doors, heard whatever was in the wind.
These are the coarsest mills in which all gossip is first rudely digested or cracked
up before it is emptied into finer and more delicate hoppers with indoors. I observed
that the vitals of the village were the grocery, the bar-room, the post-office, and the bank,
and as a necessary part of the machinery they kept a bell, a big gun, and a fire-engine
at convenient places, and the houses were so arranged as to make the most of mankind,
in lanes and fronting one another so that every traveller had to run the gauntlet, and
every man, woman, and child might get a lick at him. Of course those who were stationed
nearest to the head of the line, where they could most see and be seen, and have the first
blow at him, paid the highest prices for their places, and the few straggling inhabitants
the outskirts, where long gaps in the line began to occur, and the traveller could get
over walls or turn aside into cow-paths and so escape, paid a very slight ground or window
tax. Signs were hung out on all sides to allure him, some to catch him by the appetite, as
the tavern and victuling cellar, some by the fancy, as the dry goods-store and the jewellers,
and others by the hair or the feet or the skirts, as the barber, the shoemaker, or
the tailor. Besides, there was a still more terrible standing invitation to call at every
one of these houses, and company expected about these times. For the most part I escaped
wonderfully from these dangers, either by proceeding at once boldly and without deliberation
the goal, as is recommended to those who run the gauntlet, or by keeping my thoughts on
high things, like Orpheus, who, loudly singing the praises of the gods to his lyre, drowned
the voices of the sirens and kept out of danger. Sometimes I bolted suddenly, and nobody could
tell my whereabouts, for I did not stand much about gracefulness, and never hesitated at
the gap in a fence. I was even accustomed to make an eruption into some houses, where
I was well entertained, and after learning the kernels and very last sieveful of news,
what had subsided, the prospects of war and peace, and whether the world was likely to
hold together much longer, I was let out through the rear avenues, and so escaped to the woods
again. It was very pleasant, when I stayed late in town, to launch myself into the night,
especially if it was dark and tempestuous, and set sail for some bright village parlour
or lecture room, with a bag of rye or Indian meal upon my shoulder, for my snug harbour
in the woods, having made all tight, without and withdrawn under hatches with a merry crew
of thoughts, leaving only my outer man at the helm, or even tying up the helm when it
was plain sailing. I had many a genial thought by the cabin fire, as I sailed. I was never
cast away, nor distressed in any weather, though I encountered some severe storms. It
is darker in the woods, even in common nights, than most suppose. I frequently had to look
up at the opening between the trees above the path in order to learn my route, and,
where there was no cart path, to feel with my feet the faint track which I had worn,
or steer by the known relation of particular trees which I felt with my hands, passing
between two pines, for instance, not more than eighteen inches apart, in the midst of
the woods, invariably, in the darkest night. Sometimes, after coming home thus late in
a dark and muggy night, when my feet felt the path which my eyes could not see, dreaming
and absent-minded all the way, until I was aroused by having to raise my hand to lift
the latch, I have not been able to recall a single step of my walk, and I have thought
that perhaps my body would find its way home if its master should forsake it, as the hand
finds its way to the mouth without assistance. Several times, when a visitor chanced to stay
into evening, and it proved a dark night, I was obliged to conduct him to the cart path
in the rear of the house, and then point out to him the direction he was to pursue, and
keeping which he was to be guided rather by his feet than his eyes.
One very dark night I directed thus on their way two young men who had been fishing in
the pond. They lived about a mile off through the woods, and were quite used to the route.
A day or two after one of them told me that they wandered about the greater part of the
night, close by their own premises, and did not get home till toward morning, by which
there had been several heavy showers in the meanwhile, and the leaves were very wet, they
were drenched to their skins. I have heard of many going astray even in the village streets,
when the darkness was so thick that you could cut it with a knife, as the saying is. Some
who live in the outskirts, having come to town a-shopping in their wagons, have been
obliged to put up for the night, and gentlemen and ladies making a call have gone half a
mile out of their way, feeling the sidewalk only with their feet, and not knowing when
they turned. It is a surprising and memorable as well as valuable experience to be lost
in the woods any time. Often in a snowstorm, even by day, one will come out upon a well-known
road, and yet find it impossible to tell which way leads to the village, though he knows
he has travelled it a thousand times, he cannot recognize a feature in it, but it is as strange
to him as if it were a road in Siberia. By night, of course, the perplexity is infinitely
greater. In our most trivial walks we are constantly, though unconsciously, steering
like pilots by certain well-known beacons and headlands, and if we go beyond our usual
course we still carry in our minds the bearing of some neighbouring cape, and not till we
are completely lost or turned around, for a man needs only to be turned around once
with his eyes shut in this world to be lost. Do we appreciate the vastness and strangeness
of nature? Every man has to learn the points of compass again as often as beawakes, whether
from sleep or any abstraction, not till we are lost. In other words, not till we have
lost the world do we begin to find ourselves and realize where we are and the infinite
extent of our relations. One afternoon near the end of the first summer, when I went to
the village to get a shoe from the cobblers, I was seized and put into jail, because,
as I have elsewhere related, I did not pay a tax to, or recognize the authority of, the
state which buys and sells men, women, and children, like cattle, at the door of its
senate house. I had gone down to the woods for other purposes, but wherever a man goes
men will pursue and paw him with their dirty institutions, and if they can constrain him
to belong to their desperate odd-fellow society. It is true, I might have resisted forcibly
with more or less effect, might have run amok against society, but I preferred that society
should run amok against me, it being the desperate party. However, I was released the next day,
obtained my mended shoe, and returned to the woods, in season to get my dinner of huckleberries
on Fairhaven Hill. I was never molested by any person but those who represented the state.
I had no lock nor bolt but for the desk which held my papers, not even a nail to put over
my latch or windows. I never fastened my door night or day, though I was to be absent several
days, not even when the next fall I spent a fortnight in the woods of Maine. And yet
my house was more respected than if it had been surrounded by a file of soldiers. The
tired rambler could rest and warm himself by my fire, the literary amuse himself with
a few books on my table, or the curious, by opening my closet door, see what was left
of my dinner and what prospect I had of supper. Yet though many people of every class came
this way to the pond, I suffered no serious inconvenience from these sources, and I never
missed anything but one small book, a volume of Homer, which perhaps was improperly gilded,
and this I trust a soldier of our camp has found by this time.
I am convinced that if all men were to live as simply as I then did, thieving and robbery
would be unknown. These take place only in communities where some have got more than
is sufficient, while others have not enough. The pope's homers would soon get properly
distributed. Nec bella feront faginus astabat dom scifus ante dapus. Nor wars did men molest
when only beech and bowls were in request. You who govern public affairs, what need have
you to employ punishments? Love virtue, and the people will be virtuous. The virtues of
a superior man are like the wind. The virtues of a common man are like the grass. Eye the
grass, when the wind passes over it, bends.